[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger and today
we're going to address this very key problem of
infinity in mathematics which supposedly plays
a big role but actually doesn't really logically
work so it's time for us to face the music
and expel Infinity from mathematics and return
mathematics to a more modest sensible logical
Enterprise the way it used to be before the 20th
century fantasy story got so overblown so we need
to return to the time when concrete computations
were really what was required we want to make
computations that are concrete that are down
to earth that we can actually complete and show
people and we want explicit examples that can
be fully written down not just abstract stringing
of phrases together let such and such be the such
when you do such and then you get such but rather
have a look at this right that's the kind of thing
that we really want and it means a very big change
in our mentality in our habits of thinking in our
approach to what we are doing here in mathematics
it's also time to reassert The crucial role of
clear definitions and careful reasoning over
the current axiomatic wishful thinking we've
gotten ourselves into a very big mess it's time to
actually acknowledge that and then to move forward
okay and the way to move forward is to go back
to the importance the all importance of clear
definitions all the key words need to be very
clearly specified and laid out and there's no
reason for postulating all kinds of things that
we would like to be true without going through
the work of actually proving them that's not real
mathematics now in our last few videos we've been
talking about complexity and very big numbers and
we've seen that most of the numbers n from one
to zed z being 10 triangle 10 + 23 that means
10 the 10 to the 10 to the 10 the Tower of 10
10 + 23 most of the numbers natural numbers from
one to The Zed have very big complexity they have
complexity bigger than 10 triangle 4 and we've
seen that that means that they really cannot be
expressed in our universe these numbers are Beyond
us it's that then even questionable to what extent
they exist but now we'd like to turn our attention
to not the numbers less than Zed but the numbers
bigger than Zed and clearly the problems that we
have from one to zed are going to be considerably
expanded upon when we go beyond Zed now any
such number such as say this one here must
have complexity less than 10 triangle 4 if they
are to be visible so if we're going to consider
numbers bigger than Z that we can actually see
that we can write down that we can specify in
some fashion or another then their complexity has
to be lower than this number so that it's possible
to express them in our visible universe and this
makes them very very special because there are so
few numbers proportionally speaking in this range
once we go past Zed that have such hugely small
complexities the complexity of Zed is very small
but numbers like this are very uh special they're
sort of uncharacteristic they are very singular
anomalies in this sort of zoo of of numbers that
we're supposing are out there and more to the
point there are at most 10 triangle four of
them right if we're going to consider numbers
Beyond Zed that we can actually write down then
they have to be first of all very special numbers
but moreover there's actually a relatively small
number of them relatively small meaning less than
this humongous number but this is the number that
we've seen is sort of supportable in the Universe
even if we imagine ourselves writing at the plank
scale and using the entire universe so there's
only really a very constrained finite number of
them especially when you consider we're talking
about you know vastly uh bigger numbers than
this one in particular there's not an infinite
number of numbers that you can actually write
down this should be well understood I mean it's
kind of obvious if you think about things in a
physically realistic way in other words if we
take seriously what it is that the physicists
the astronomers are trying to tell us about
the world in which we live in and it's really
collapsing this whole nonsense of infinite
sets right I mean the universe is a very big
but ultimately bounded kind of finite place
we don't know how big that bound is but most
physicists are pretty convinced that there's
actually a limit to the world in which we live
in therefore a limit to the complexity and the
size of the mathematical objects that we are
able even in principle to consider now of course
by modern 20th century mathematics standards the
idea that there are not infinite sets there's
not an infinite number of natural numbers
there's not an infinite number of anything in
fact is very heretical it's going against a
fundamental belief system which is enshrined
and encoded in so much of 20th century
mathematics it will be very challenging for
a lot of people who have been trained in this
system who have learned from an early
age that all of mathematics or at least
very much of mathematics is ultimately build on
infinite sets here infinite sets there infinite
functions there infinite operators there Etc
uh very significant mind change needs to be
made but we can for example look at the physical
world and ask ourselves are there any infinite
things in our world if we ask a physicist for
example are there any infinitely long objects
like there there's an object it's not that long
make it longer imagine you know an object like
this may be a kilm long maybe we can imagine it 10
km long maybe we can even imagine it 1,000 km long
maybe 1,000 light years long okay it's starting
to push the bounds but is it possible to have an
infinitely long object perhaps like an infinitely
long drumstick in our world well I think every
lay person whether they're a physicist or not is
going to say well of course not it's ridiculous
doesn't make any sense even the meaning of that
phrase is questionable how about infinitely heavy
objects here for example is a marker it's not
too heavy we can imagine it's getting heavier
we can imagine changing the materials that it's
made out of so it starts getting heavier okay
so let's imagine it's getting heavier oh it's
harder and harder to hold up now we imagine it
getting heavier and heavier and heavier perhaps
it eventually gets to be a ton I can no longer
hold it up then eventually it gets to be 1,000
tons goes crashing through the floor of my room
a trillion tons okay maybe it's made out of some
kind of black hole material but is it possible
to imagine that this is an infinitely heavy object
can we let the weight go to Infinity again if phys
this would say of course not the ordinary person
on the street would say of course not that's just
not possible but that is the kind of thinking
that mathematicians do all the time they say
all right we have something we kind of understand
it in a finite situation let's go to infinity and
then we get some new kind of object that we can't
actually see or write down or experience directly
but we can imagine it how about an infinitely
fast object maybe someone who can run 100 MERS
much faster than usin bolt maybe 100 meters
in one second okay shoot a bullet no problem
how about in one trillionth of a second okay maybe
a photon now let's let the velocity go to Infinity
is there an object that can go infinitely fast you
start the race and at the same time it's already
at the Finish Line 100 meters down the road is
that possible no right doesn't make any sense it
just doesn't exist how about infite amount of time
as far as we know doesn't make any sense in fact
the meanings of each of these terms one should
understand are already questionable it's not
clear what this even means what does it mean to be
infinitely long what does it mean to be infinitely
heavy what does it mean to be infinitely fast it's
really not uh clear that these things are defined
correctly except just sort of by stringing words
together so I claim that in mathematics we Face a
similar situation as we do in the real world that
talk about infinitely large objects infinitely
large sets doesn't make any sense not only doesn't
make any sense but it's logically unnecessary to
create beautiful mathematics that reflects the
world that we live in it's not necessary to have
Infinity now there will be some Defenders of
infinity that will argue that what I'm saying
may be very reasonable for the physical world but
it doesn't apply to the mathematical world because
it's intrinsically different that we're operating
in a in an intellectual realm in a perhaps even
imaginary realm that's not necessarily
connected with reality so what we can do
in reality doesn't necessarily correspond and so
they will say that even though we cannot exhibit
infinite sets we can think about them
abstractly in fact logically they may
even assert that once you have the notion of a
finite set then the notion of an infinite set is
just sort of complementary to it a set which
is not finite is infinite it's a very common
argument just look at all the sets and then
the ones which are not finite AR necessarily
infinite okay that argument presupposes that
you have a notion of sets which already includes
things which are infinite you know yes if we
had a big pool of sets and some of them were
finite and some of them were infinite then
yes you could argue that the ones which are
not finite are infinite but we don't have such
a pool of sets to begin with we need to define
the term infinite it's not just all of the
things which are not finite that's a kind
of grammatical construction very common but it
doesn't really work and let me illustrate that
by looking at some other examples there's lots
of kind of Concepts that you can you know create
at some level by taking a legitimate concept
and then sticking a negation in front of it
in some fashion or another for example how about
an Unstoppable Mouse now most mice can be stopped
you can put a wall in front of them and they can't
go through the wall you can put them in a box you
can stop them okay so we have the notion of an
stoppable Mouse does it mean therefore that we
have a notion of an Unstoppable Mouse is that
a sort of a necessary sort of flip side to the
concept how about an invisible hotel we can see
lots of hotels which are visible does it mean that
there are then invisible hotels because logically
the fact that there is visible hotels means that
there must be invisible ones how about immovable
kittens most kittens are movable so can we
postulate the existence of immovable kittens just
by creating this grammatical expression or how
about an incompressible mattress most mattresses
are compressible can push them down a little bit
and so stick this little in in front of it and
suddenly we have a New Concept are these really
legitimate Concepts well you can ask yourself well
are there any of these things no there aren't okay
the concepts are grammatical constructions not
really conceptual constructions they're things
that you get by just stringing certain words
together irrespective of whether they actually
result in a proper definition so many people
will say no no we can still imagine infinite
sets I may not be able to build one but I can
imagine it the set of all natural numbers I can
imagine that set and I claim that no you cannot
what you can perhaps do is you can imagine that
you can imagine an infinite set that I'm willing
to Grant you you can imagine that you can imagine
an infinite set but you can't actually imagine
an infinite set so the term infinite set is not
the opposite of a finite set what it is is the
unjustified expansion of a legitimate notion into
a realm which is unsupported by direct experience
we're taking a concept which does make some sense
and expanding it linguistically grammatically to
an area where it doesn't really apply now I have
a Blog which I write in occasionally the uh name
is NJ wildberger that's actually the URL there
the blog's name is tangential thoughts and most of
the entries are connected some way or another with
mathematics and at the end of last year I wrote a
Blog called a new logical principle and this blog
in particular I think is interesting because it
introduces first of all some healthy skepticism
towards the laws of logic okay this idea that the
laws of logic are not set in stone and and that
we can discuss and critique and debate what
are the laws of logic okay they're not given
to us from on high and it also introduces a new
principle I think it's a very important principle
that has a lot to do with this discussion I want
to introduce it to you so here is my new logical
principle The Law of logical honesty it is don't
pretend that you can do something that you can't
simple who can argue with that that's what
we're doing a lot of the time in current
pure mathematics okay and in particular very
important example don't pretend that you can
put all the natural numbers into a box
that's what you're doing when you write
down this it's a pretending that you can do
something that you demonstrably can not do
we've seen the complexity when we get to bigger
and bigger numbers we seen that things get very
very difficult to describe and the number of
numbers that we can actually write down starts
to thin out more and more and eventually stops
because of size limitations and where exactly
it stops well we don't know exactly right it's
not as if there's a biggest number and then we
can get to that but we can get no further rather
the job just gets more and more tougher we slow
down and eventually the size of the problem
overwhelms us long before we've gotten to the
end of all the numbers so to pretend that you can
put all the natural numbers into this box and say
hey guys I've got the set of natural numbers
here now that is a pretending it's really a
kind of intellectual fraud okay and the law of
logical honesty says let's stop doing that guys
okay now this is not some idle philosophical
discussion this is an argument that has enormous
implications for modern pure mathematics huge
consequences in particular it's a necessary
consequence of understanding that there are no
infinite things of any kind whatsoever it's a
necessary consequence to realize that most of
these subjects these topics in pure mathematics
essentially collapse logically in their current
form they are just not self-supporting anymore
you pull the rug of the infinite delusion out and
they all sag in a very sad way we're talking about
analysis topology differential geometry algebraic
geometry algebraic number Theory differential
equations measure Theory analytic number Theory
Lee Theory certain parts of algebra a lot of them
really have very serious dependencies on infinite
reasoning and once we Face the music with respect
to the nonexistence and nonsensical nature of
infinite sets and other infinite things then these
subjects really become uh very tenuous logically
common TOs and some Rel disciplines remain largely
unscathed okay but a lot of mathematics really
has to be rethought so we have a huge amount
of work to do here okay it's a very very big
challenge especially for you young people who
are entering mathematics now don't underestimate
the huge job that you are going to have to tackle
because what I'm saying here will eventually be
uh taken up by other people already there are
uh people from computer science backgrounds and
other backgrounds who are starting to think more
sensibly about what's really going on and the the
current belief system is just not sustainable for
that much longer of course it will be sustained
just by habit and and authority and people trying
hard not to uh you know see what's going on but
but ultimately it really has to be changed and you
young people are going to have to do a lot of it
so there's a lot of work to be done but it's very
exciting because it means that we can transform
these subjects we can really we can really make
a big contribution here right it's not the case
that mathematics is set in stone and that you
can only add a little bit that's not the case at
all okay all of these subjects have to be rebuilt
someone has to come along and take Le Theory and
say let's do it right let's start correctly and
build it up in a very solid way hasn't been done
I know I was a Le theorist for a long time okay
and it's representing huge opportunities for young
people new directions very exciting but scary at
the same time now there will be practitioners
who will try to cling to the belief that small
modifications will fix things that we can just
change the axioms or that we can somehow patch
up the real number system or that we can sort
of rephrase things without doing a lot of work
but believe me that's not going to really uh
be much more than a Band-Aid solution okay
fundamentally we have to rethink a lot of things
that are going on and in my channel here you can
see lots of evidence you can see already I'm
putting into place ways of thinking about
different subjects pretty well all of my series
more or less have this orientation underlying them
so you can see examples of how it's possible to do
various subjects or at least start doing various
subjects in a more logical finite computational
concrete down to earth right downable way okay
feet on the floor so although many of these
subjects will collapse they can be rebuilt
and they will be rebuilt okay the result will be a
stronger and more logical and more computationally
useful mathematics once we put in the hard work
of rethinking the foundations of all of these
subjects we will end up with a much more beautiful
and much more powerful and much more useful
mathematics in the meantime we don't need to
just get rid of all of the uh mathematics that
we've been doing we don't have to say that these
theorems are all wrong okay what's better is to
just think about importing these disciplines from
Pure maths temporarily into applied math in other
words to interpret the so-called theorems as
actually not really theorems but as approximate
statements that have some legitimate meaning
in the world of approximate statements okay
so it's not as if these the things that have been
discovered are no longer of value there are still
of value but they will form the basis for a
more precise and logical new mathematics but
the current results can still be interpreted
in an applied sense and then um well they can
be processed and used much as we do already in
fact that's already happening I mean computers
take these subjects and take all these sort of
Ideal assertions involving infinite sets and real
numbers and just strip all the infinities away
from them anyway convert all the real numbers to
floating point and work over here with basically
applied sort of finite images of them so that's
effectively already what's happening uh from an
applied point of view okay so some interesting
and controversial positions that we've mapped out
today right uh very much so and it's a little bit
saddening for me to have to be so negative
but on the other hand it is necessary for me
to give people a push because if you don't give
people a push they're not going to move they're
quite happy where they are doing their thing um
just ignoring to a large extent the very serious
logical problems sort of minimizing them but we
want to go beyond that we really want to move
into a more happy uh framework for mathematics
in my next video I want to return to uh big
numbers and show you how to even get bigger
numbers than we've got before and that'll
be some fun hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman wildberger thanks for listening
[Music]